You need all the infrastructure to run
these environments that have to mimic as
closely as possible what a user's
computer would look like. And it's very
important as closely as possible because
sometimes the model can actually figure
out when it's being run in like a fake
environment or not a real one and it has
like different behaviors during RL than
in production. Are you saying it being
conscious that it's being is in a fake
environment and it starts being behaving
differently?
>> Yes. Yes.
>> Interesting. Like it's like oh I'm in a
fake environment. I've learned a few
tricks to like get the better reward in
this environment and let me try them
out. Models love to cheat. RL is really
good at encouraging cheating.
>> [music]
[music]
>> I'm delighted to welcome Federico from
Cursor and Dima from Fireworks to the
podcast today. Federico, you are the
research lead on Composer 2 at Cursor,
Cursor's new agentic coding model. And
Dima, you spent how many of the last few
months moonlighting at Cursor in order
to support all of the infrastructure
required to make this gargantuan
training task happen. And so, I'm
excited to talk to both of you today
about how the training of Composer 2
came together, what hard problems you
solved together, and what you think it
means for the future of of AI and
foundation model companies. Exciting.
Yeah, exciting. Thank you for having us.
Thanks for joining. Okay, let's dive
right in. For those who haven't been
following as closely, uh Cursor recently
announced Composer 2, which is an
agentic coding model uh meant for long
horizon coding tasks. Federico, uh up
till now, um Cursor was mostly uh
enabling uh other people's uh coding
agents. Uh what was the impetus for
Cursor to lean so heavily into Composer
2, and how existential is it for you to
become not just an application company
but also a foundation model company
yourselves? The reason why we started
looking into training our own models is
you can sort of think about the model as
sort of like like a storage drive. It
has certain amount of bits that it can
store in its weights. And the idea is
very simple, you know, like we care
about only one task.
We don't even care about coding or
programming necessarily. We care about
software engineering inside cursor and
inside cursor only. And so, what if we
were to allocate all of the bits
of information that can be stored inside
the model weights to that one particular
task?
Also, as people may have noticed,
composer is order of magnitude less
expensive than Opus and other like
coding models because we can just simply
specialize all of the model weights to
that particular task. And so, we can
serve like a smaller model or
something of that sort, yeah. So, it's
about let's make sure every single bit
of weight or information we have is
dedicated toward the specific problem
that we have at hand. Exactly. Got it.
Um that seems like it's an almost
generalizable problem. Uh Dima, I'm
curious your perspective. Do you think
that every application company should be
looking at cursor as a harbinger of
what's to come? Like should they all be
looking to do the same thing? Yeah,
absolutely. I mean, we actually
generally see it as a pattern of kind of
evolution of the applications. You maybe
start prototyping, you might be using
kind of off-the-shelf model to get
something running, maybe do some prompt
engineering, figure out how your harness
works. But the most kind of leveraged
attribute of your application is the
actual usage of
user data or particular specific aspects
of how this application works, maybe
some aspects of your harness, which
tools do you provide, how the
application works, kind of really
important bits which are important for
your application. And the right way to
capture that, you can do a little bit of
that through prompting, but really the
right way to do this is craft your model
to act in your environment.
>> Yeah, absolutely. Like there are certain
tools the agent calls that it's very
hard to succinctly describe exactly the
behavior of that tool to the model. And
you know, with just like post-training,
we can bake in the optimal way to use
those tools. Like Composer, we do serve
a prompt to Composer, but I I think the
way we are training it, it would work
even without a prompt and it would know
what to do just because like we are
intrinsically pushing the model to like
the right direction of how it should act
throughout our training. Basically,
there's kind of like upper bound of like
how far you can get with prompt
engineering. And if you want to uh craft
really great AI products, you have to go
through kind of fine-tuning and
influence model behavior. That's kind of
one reason. I mean, reason number two is
what Federico mentioned is kind of cost
trade-off or XP trade-off. Like the way
we kind of view it at Fireworks is that
when you're trying to do optimization,
you have this like three-dimensional
trade-off between quality, speed, and
cost.
And uh you can go quite far and we're
doing it with all of our customers
initially. We can go quite far with just
optimizing infrastructure, but when you
start getting to model training, you can
really push this trade-off much further
and you can get better model at fraction
of the cost running much faster. And you
know, Composer is a great example of
>> Can I push on this a little bit? I want
to ask you if this approach is better
lesson pills. And we were we were
actually all talking about TabNine on
the walk-in. I'm remembering before the
LLM era, there were these like small
specialized coding models. And one of
the things that was I think surprising
to to a lot of people was as you've
scaled up, you know, you scaled up just
training on the internet and a lot of a
bunch of English text and other
languages, actually the models
themselves got inherently better at
coding as well. And so at least the
trend line I've seen so far is just like
bigger models perform better on
everything including on coding. Is what
you guys are saying, does that go
against the grain of the better lesson?
I think no, but one one sort of like
thing to point out is that the big
models trained by the labs train on a
lot of code as well. Like code is one of
the main tasks the labs are interested
in pushing and so they don't just
generalize to it. They're a bit
specialized as well. I think for our
case, actually, you know, if we believe
about the bitter lesson, we are just
pushing very hard on the data dimension,
and we know that the models inherently
have finite capacity. And so, if we want
to saturate all that capacity, we need
to scale data. And in order to ingest
more data, we we need to like free up
the weights from distractions the model
may have. Mhm, okay. Got it. Super
interesting. Okay, let's dig into the
training of Composer 2. You launched a
couple weeks ago, immediately grabbed
attention. Strong benchmark numbers,
much lower cost to to run inference on.
What's the short version of how Composer
2 works, and and what you guys did to
make it so performant?
>> We started from a very strong base,
which is uh Kimmy 2.5. It's like a 1
trillion and parameter MoE, that's 30 B
active, so very very sparse, actually.
We sort of like looked at the stock and
realized there are like two axes. So,
mainly Composer 1 was just pushing on
one of these axes, which is
reinforcement learning, but Composer 2
pushes in two different axes. One is
continual pre-training, and the other is
reinforcement learning. So, the thing
that made Composer 2 very good is
pushing in both of these directions. So,
we started off the training run by doing
lots of mid-training on code tokens,
almost sort of pre-training scale,
actually. And then, coming out of that
mid-training run, we took the
checkpoints and we did very large-scale
RL on lots of lots of tasks.
Okay, and then the premise here would be
because Cursor sits in the middle of so
many interesting coding tokens, you
actually pretty uniquely have access to
data to be able to train at almost
pre-training scale. Yeah. Why not
pre-train your own model, then?
We just think about our approach from
top-down instead of bottom-up. So, like,
how do we get a model that's useful to
users in the least time possible if we
were to start from the bottom, sort of
figure out how how we do pre-training
and then scale it up to mid-training and
then, okay, now we figured out
mid-training, now we do reinforcement
learning. That would take a very long
time to get a model out to our users. By
doing it the other way around, we were
able to give our useful model to our
users in very little time. So,
hopefully, you know, like
next Composer versions are going to be
our own model instead of basing it off
an open-source base. And what is the
model roughly learning in the kind of
mid-training step? And what is the model
learning in the post-training step for
you? Yeah, so in mid-training, it's sort
of just kind of learning about libraries
of code and learning about specific code
patterns that are very common, like just
world knowledge as well. There is like
web data there as well. And this is sort
of just creating a wider distribution
that then reinforcement learning can
sharpen on. And so, during reinforcement
learning, you know, the model gets to
play directly with the cursor harness.
And so, it gets to learn about the world
the model is going to live in for the
rest of its life, right? In in some way.
And and so, then during reinforcement
learning, that's where it learns how to
call tools properly, how to navigate its
environment, how to write correct code.
Because during mid-training, it it
learns how to write code. That doesn't
necessarily mean it learns how to write
correct code. We try to train on code
that is largely only correct, but the
model doesn't actually know how to
differentiate between the two. While in
RL, one of the key things that we're
doing is we're kind of tuning the
feature of the model saying, "Hey, now
you got to write correct code all the
time." Exactly.
>> Interesting. And is the is the model
after mid-training, is that similar to
the model you guys have on Tab
autocomplete, or is that a different
core competency? Yeah, I mean, it's uh
yeah, I think I would put it like that
because like during mid-training we are
just doing next token prediction, you
know, like how well you predict the next
token and then the token after that. So,
yeah. So, why not just pre-train your
tab on a complete model then? Why
mid-train is a different model then?
>> Yeah, I mean tab is a very small model
because it's like a super low latency
model.
Um, yes, we want it to be very fast. So,
like the core two distinctions about the
base models here is that tab is like
small and and composer is quite large. I
see. I see.
Okay. So, it seems like a lot of the
focus of what you guys did for composer
two was this large-scale reinforcement
learning run. Can you break that down
for us? Like what goes into that and
what are the various hard problems you
solved along the way?
When you do a rollout it's quite
different from like from like
pre-training and mid-training because,
you know, you're just trying to predict
next token. You're actually running the
entire hardness, like the entire
experiment. You're letting the model act
in the environment, see how how it
performs for a given rollout. That's the
terminology which is called rollout. And
kind of assign it reward based on if it
did something correctly or not, which
might be some using LLM as a judge or
maybe something verifiable like does the
code compile or something like this,
which actually means that compared to
this regular training you need a bunch
of other components. Like you still need
large-scale training. You still need to
orchestrate tens of thousands of GPUs to
the forward backward propagation, do all
the stuff you do in mid-training and
pre-training. But now you also need to
orchestrate a bunch of environments. You
need to run model inference because
but when you do this this rollout you're
effectively running like real cursor
session in some sense, right? You have
your
>> is like a forward pass? Uh, no, rollout
is basically your entire like agent
session from cursor, right? So, you we
basically means it might take something
like 50 turns. Model will take a take
your initial prompt, then decides to
call some tools, you want to execute
those tools, then model generates a
bunch of other code, kind of entire
session which you when you interact with
agent in cursor, right? You you kind of
simulate this entire session as a part
of your training run. You get to final
reward and use the you get use that
signal to now go back to trainer and
kind incorporate it into the model
weights. So, you have this kind of very
big loop update loop, which is
very heterogeneous, right? Because you
have all these like different components
working together. And now you're trying
to orchestrate all of this to work
efficiently and work with high
throughputs because GPUs are expensive
and you want to get your model trained
quickly and in an economic fashion. So,
that's by by itself is like very
interesting kind of problem on
intersection of algorithms and
infrastructure because there are a lot
of trade-offs how you can kind of
co-optimize and co-design the system.
One aspect is kind of people call about
like this async parallel of pipeline
parallel. The idea is basically, okay,
you're trying to update this model in
steps, right? So, you have your current
model version
and you're trying to do a bunch of
rollouts with it. What does your trainer
do while you're doing this rollouts,
right? Like naive approach would say
that, "Okay, now I'm going to stop my
trainer and I'm going to do a bunch of
sessions and those sessions might run
for like 5-10 minutes or even longer if
it's like longer horizon tasks. I'm
going to get those
outcomes and now I'm going to pause my
inference and then go back to training,
trying to do updates."
That's like very theoretically
algorithmically robust because you are
not precisely simulating everything, but
it's very system inefficient because
half of your capacity is sitting idle
all the time. So, you can do all the
clever like algorithmic tricks allowing
you to
Yeah, you can you can like
[clears throat] kind of pipeline all of
this. So, imagine this as a gigantic
like factory, right? You have this like
trainer building and you have a rollouts
building. They're always churning,
right? They also rollouts always take
like latest model version and try to do
new sessions and kind of simulate new
agent sessions and trainer always takes
new outcomes as they come and try to
compute updates. So, everything is
moving along all the time. The trade-off
is that why I'm saying that
algorithmically it's different because
now by the time you finish some test
rollout in your kind of simulated
environment, maybe model weights already
updated on some other data. So, you have
this kind of staleness, like delay
between how quickly model
can learn
updates because by the time you kind of
process through some interaction session
with a simulated environment, your model
weights changed, and that introduces
interesting training dynamics, and there
are clever ways how you can address
this. But, the flip side of that is that
your all your GPUs, all your computers
kind of loaded and churning all the
time, which actually you're using more
more flops and to your better
less example, yeah, you you have like
higher compute efficiency, you can get
to a better model in small amount of
time. You may be losing a few percent
from
being asynchronous and not doing like
perfect mathematical updates, but you
way compensate for that by effectively
not leaving half your capacity on the
table. And there are a lot of kind of
depth and interesting interaction in
that part. And we're very serious about
performance at Cursor because unlike the
big labs, you know, we have tons of
thousands of GPUs, not millions, and so
yeah, we do all sorts of tricks to make
get the most out of a GPU like we train
in production with FP4 even. We work
with Fireworks to like push on inference
as well. Cuz the thing about RL
infrastructure is that just like it's
just inherently more complex than
pre-training cuz you need all the
pre-training infrastructure. That's just
like one of the requirements. Then you
need all the infrastructure to run these
environments that have to mimic as
closely as possible what a user's
computer would look like, and it's very
important it's closely as possible
because sometimes the model can actually
figure out when it's being run in like a
fake environment or in a real one, and
it has like different behaviors during
RL than in production. Are you saying it
being conscious that it's being used in
a fake environment and it starts being
behaving differently? Yes. Yes.
>> Interesting. Like it's like, "Oh, I'm in
a fake environment. I've learned a few
tricks to like get the better reward in
this environment and let me try them
out. Models love to cheat. RL is really
good at encouraging cheating. Yeah.
[snorts] Yeah, and then we need a really
efficient inference. So, this is really
important. So, there is like actually
this kind of myth that during RL you
spend more way more inference flops than
training flops. This is sort of like
just because the open source inference
engines are very unoptimized instead of
actually being a property of RL. Roughly
the same ratio is kind of the same. In
theory, if you push the GPUs to the
maximum, you should have 1/3 of your
training GPUs allocated to inference,
right? Because training is effectively
three forward passes. You have the
forward pass, you have the data
gradient, the weight gradient. While if
you really hit the critical batch size
on inference, you should only have a
single forward pass worth of flops. So,
that's why you guys use Fireworks
instead of using an open inference
engine? Yeah, I mean the other
alternative is we would build one
in-house, but you know, we have finite
engineers like everybody else. We would
like prefer to have engineers make
training more efficient and more precise
rather than like spin up like a
inference effort, yeah. Okay, that's
super hardcore. What about thinking you
mentioned in your technical paper paper
that you were doing this in a kind of
globally distributed way? Why globally
distributed and then what makes that
hard? Yeah. Yeah. Well, there are
various reasons. One, you know, like
this very large contiguous clusters are
hard to find in the market. And so, what
we can do instead is we have one cluster
that's going to run all of training. You
know, we can't do global training
cluster.
But then the inference component of
reinforcement learning, we can globally
distribute that across small clusters
all over the world. So, I think for the
composer to run, we used the four
clusters in total that were all over the
world, very far away from each other.
And we even used some of our production
traffic when it was least used. So like
we had the composer 1.5, the previous
model served, and when it was least used
by people, we just grabbed some
inference GPUs, and we put them to speed
up training. And so we can do these sort
of things,
and sort of easily scale up our training
run without having one large continuous
cluster. And the thing that enables it,
maybe Dima can talk more about
>> kind of like
to reconfirm what
Federico said is basically our RL
training is like very heterogeneous,
right? And by leveraging heterogeneity,
how different components, like what
infrastructures they need, you can
actually drive efficiency. And you see
this pattern kind of across the board
everywhere. Specifically for for
training, you have all these like highly
interconnected clusters, you need
high-speed network, kind of need to work
in lockstep. So those clusters are
expensive, right? And actually it's
really hard to find big ones, right?
Basically, at the scale with with which
composer was trained, finding like 2x
larger clusters is like significantly
harder than finding the current size
one. And that's why if you can
disaggregate these components and put
them on different places, one, you don't
need to find such a big cluster.
Two, you can actually find like
different trade-offs of hardware because
for inference you don't need that kind
of wide interconnect. You can have
smaller groups of GPUs interconnected
together. You can have heterogeneous
sets of GPUs. You can have different
generations of GPUs. You can kind of
play all these games of games of
optimization. And finally, like
inference, it's much easier to scale up
and down as you go. And yeah, it's very
connected. So like
when you have off-peak hours, you can
view all your
kind of inference pool as one set of
GPUs serving production traffic for real
users or serving simulated environments
for RL purposes, and kind of balance
balance between this. Of course, it's a
very interesting systems problem.
Federico mentioned like the Kimi model
is like one 1 TB.
Training step takes somewhere between
like 5 to 15 minutes. So it basically
means like every like every 5 to 10
minutes you are producing like 1
terabyte new snapshot of weights. So the
question is like how are you going to
ship it to a different cluster on the
other side of the world very
efficiently, right? And you want to like
do it quickly because remember you don't
want to get this staleness to get out of
hand. So I think that's was probably one
the the kind of the
the most fun part which we figured out
together is that despite you know, full
model being like 1 terabyte, not all the
weights change every step, right?
Because RL does a lot of very like
precise adjustments. Especially if the
training going on. So actually there are
very kind of regular patterns in like
which subset of weights gets changed.
Maybe not all of them change every time.
So if you were to look at like how my
model changes within one training step
like after 10 minutes, there is
relatively small delta between those.
You can write write a compression
algorithm which basically leverages this
property and now you end up with kind of
like database systems problem which is
okay, I have my delta and I just want to
like ship it across across the world. My
delta maybe is like 20 times smaller
than what shipping the full model is and
that and that makes it practical. But of
course now you need to build all this
kind of machinery from storage systems
of full snapshots and deltas and
recovery and like reconciliation etc. We
were able to build it kind of in
lossless fashion. Basically means that
like you always end up with bit
equivalent model on the other side. So
you don't need to worry about any mass
aspects of this and you can do it really
fast too. You can you you can do it
under you know, under a few minutes.
Even in the worst conditions usually
it's under a minute and most importantly
you like pause only for like maybe 30
seconds to swap the weights in your
actual inference model. We also like
fully like saturated the band egress of
the cluster by like sharding the upload
and the download as well. So you can do
all this like system tricks to bring the
stand down. It is It is quite a few
complexity but you can kind of abstract
it out and just make it work great. Like
it doesn't interfere with your training
algorithm and on the flip side you have
this
kind of power to disaggregate to
leverage other clusters to do that. And
that's kind of goes against kind of
conventional wisdom of how you should do
RL infrastructure because, you know,
conventional wisdom is like you Okay,
you're going to have this really huge
one cluster connected with RDMA, and
it's going to be very expensive, and
you're going to probably spend, you
know, maybe you're going to allocate
like 1/3 to training and 2/3 to
inference. And sure, if you have very
expensive network, it's much easier to
copy this 1 TB quickly, but now we have
like three times larger cluster. Now, if
your inference engine is more optimized,
then maybe you you're going to save 1/3
of that cluster in terms of GPUs anyway
because you're just more efficient, and
you can take, you know, half of this
cluster somewhere else in a maybe
cheaper hardware in a different region.
So, your cost comes down quite a bit. I
love that you guys are just grinning as
you describe this because it's like it's
so hard, and this is like a systems
engineer's dream, right? And so, it's
just like a it's amazing amazing system
you guys have built.
>> a bunch of nights working on this.
>> Yeah. You look like you spent a long
time together. A lot of time together.
What about I mean, you mentioned at the
beginning that Kimi is a very large
sparse MLE model. Does that make the RL
run tricky in any way?
>> Mhm. Yep.
>> How so? Well, when you do inference,
you're essentially doing like a forward
pass. It's just kind of like
autoregressive.
And in this forward pass, it produces
like log probabilities of like the
tokens that it has sampled. When we ship
back the like generations of the model
to the trainer, we have to rerun that
forward pass because as we mentioned, we
are doing asynchronous training. So, the
model that has produced the pass may
have been like actually a few steps
behind what the trainer is at. And so,
we have to rerun that forward pass and
reproduce log probabilities. Now,
the problem is in theory, these log
probabilities should be exactly the same
if it's the same model version. But even
with the same model version, you get
slightly or sometimes
very different log probability values
for the same tokens. So, this is often
called what like a numerical mismatch
for inference. You hear this about all
the time these days. For mixture
>> Why Why is that? Why does that happen? I
mean, primarily because like
fundamentally floating point arithmetic,
which is doing this is
non-deterministic. So, if you
>> So, why floating point arithmetic is
non-deterministic?
>> know, you you learn this code like if
you take A plus B plus C, right? And
like C plus B plus A, it's going to be
the same result. If you're doing this
with integers, with whole numbers on the
computer, that's going to be always
true. If you're going to do it with
floating point numbers, which are
actually like approximation numbers you
have this like mantissa and exponent
etc. A plus B plus C and C plus B plus A
is going to give you like different
results or even like A plus B and B So,
basically fundamentally it's
accumulation order of like all these
operations which models do is basically
multiplications and additions. And like
addition order matters to your final
result. It's all like small differences,
but they get amplified through like
millions and billions of operations. So,
when you do inference on models, usually
it doesn't matter that much because you
pre-train your model, you actually
pretty robust. If you like flip some
bits, it's still going to produce you
like good results. Your benchmarks are
not going to change. But, RL in
particular because you're using this
very, very like weak signal to teach the
model, the noise from this numerical
differences can make or break your
training. And that's like particularly
important. And again, it's a interesting
intersection between like algorithmic
and systems part because, you know, you
can write a beautiful mess and it just
doesn't work in practice.
There are ways how you can drive this
difference to pretty much zero. There
are all these like batching variant ways
you can Basically, you can be very, very
careful and write all your GPU kernels
so they always add numbers in the same
order, so you always do like A plus B
plus C and not a different order.
It's possible, but it always has a
trade-off, right? Basically, your like
your system becomes maybe like 2x or 3x
slower. Again, it becomes an interesting
trade-off like, okay, what is there 10%
of slow down which we can take or in
fact it's actually probably a few
percent of slow down we can take to
address 90% of this difference. That's
you know the right trade-off which
kind of we
we find together through through
iteration and you mentioned that
particularly for MOEs and sparsity is
hard. The reason for that is that like
the way MOEs work is that you would take
your activations at every layer and you
would run it through gating layer which
is basically decides okay for this token
I'm going to run out of 384 experts I'm
going to run this eight. Right? So it's
going to do like some messing like top
eight scores. Those eight experts going
to be activated other ones will not be
activated for this token. This operation
amplifies your small numerical
differences quite a bit because maybe
your hidden states were like difference
by like fifth digit after dot doesn't
really matter but this difference made
it so you picked expert number seven
versus expert number nine as a kind of
at the cutoff and suddenly you went and
like activated totally different part of
the model and your difference got
amplified quite a bit. And my models by
definition are like very more sensitive
to this mismatch. Again, when you do
inference or when you do kind of regular
loud it usually doesn't matter and they
average out but now if you're trying to
make this model learn this difference is
huge because your inference activated
expert number seven. Now in your
training you're trying to like update
expert number nine which didn't even
contribute to that during inference. So
were you guys handwriting GPU kernels
then to help get around this problem?
>> Yeah. Yes. So you can again you can
address all of this through GPU kernels
and there's always trade-off.
Specifically for MOE you can do this
interesting trick which people call
router replay but basically you can have
your inference just pass extra
information to training and say that hey
I activated expert seven for this token.
This very small bit piece of information
is just one integer saying that like
okay this is the expert which I
activated so trainer can be aligned with
that. And a lot of this numerical
alignment is basically doing tricks like
that, matching quantization levels,
matching kernels, etc.
to drive the divergence between training
and inference implementation down. And
that makes huge difference in between,
you know, your own maybe divergent
completely or being, you know, multiplex
less compute efficient because you'll
need much more data to address to this
mismatch. I'd love to maybe chat a
little bit more about the RL kind of
recipe. Can you say a word about the
reward signal you're using? Is it Is
like Are you can Okay, can't say. Got
it. Top secret stuff. Top secret stuff.
Okay, that makes sense. Like it seems
this is a almost like the equivalent of
learning in sim. This is simulated
rollouts versus like you have so much
actual user data that you could be
learning on. Why not just do RL on your
your actual user data and your actual
user harness versus doing this in sim?
Yeah, we're also doing that. So that's
what we call the real-time RL. Okay. And
we use the same technology to do like
the inference with sync with like
fireworks to do this. We find like user
signals where the user was happy or sad
about a particular model generation.
And we're able to update that model live
and so then ship a new version of the
model continuously every few hours.
We're working on decreasing that time.
Actually, at some point we'll have to
increase that time because as the
horizon of the model gets longer and
longer, we'll have to re-extend that
time. So like an interesting play. Like
right now we are trying to decrease the
time for stability because we were
figuring out the right hyper parameters
and then after we have figured it out we
have to re-extend it again just because
we want to lengthen the horizon of these
models, yeah. Do you need to do any of
the kind of like pre-training simulated
RL? You have so much actual user data. I
imagine that's just like much more
valuable to to train and tune on. Like
why not just go straight to the online
RL step? Why why do you have to do the
the offline RL? The online RL currently
is pretty inefficient. We suffer from
this problem that the GPUs are offline
for a long time
essentially. And beside that there's
also like different trade-offs also in
terms of efficiency and user experience.
>> Yeah.
>> If you do simulation, you actually do
multiple rollouts from the same prompt,
right? You effectively take a task and
you ask a model to do 16 tries of the
task or like 128 tries of the task like
different rollouts from the same prompt.
Some of them are going to uh go go well,
some of them are not going to go well.
And by doing it multiple rollouts in
parallel, you are able to get much more
precise signal. Maybe like, you know,
maybe a model is very good and it does
it well 90% of the time. Maybe it's not
very good. Losses like GRPO like group
group policy gradient like kind of work
by doing multiple rollouts at the same
time. If you're doing online, you have
only one uh rollout coming back. And so
so trade-offs of like how you do it
algorithmically different. And most
importantly, if your simulated rollout
goes wrong, it's not it's not bad,
right? I mean, you just, you know, maybe
you spend some time on the view. Uh if
it's actual user, you you have much
higher like minimum bar on that because
effectively you're doing AB test, right?
So if the model produces something
weird, like that's a bad user
experience.
>> Yeah. Okay. So you can go off policy
more often when it's not a real user
because you can like you can experiment
with like crazy things and without
affecting the user experience. You can
do a lot more rollouts. You can do GRPO.
Yeah. Um and then you can basically like
bootstrap some level of performance
that's good enough to even put in front
of users. Okay.
>> Yeah, like we teach reasoning through
like the offline RL, which is actually
like called online RL. Offline RL is
more like DPO kind of technique to sort
of reinforce kind of RL is online. Uh
and then we there we like teach the
reasoning to the model. We give it some
kind of input of the behavior it should
have. Uh we try to give it to new
information about the world and we teach
it tool calling.
And then we put it live to users. Cuz
you could imagine like if the model is
bad, users don't want to use it. They're
not going to give us any feedback,
right? So the model has to meet some
kind of bar to even like be put into
online RL. Like we want to be really
happy with the model, and this is the
model we ship. That's kind of the
paradox of online
online RL or how we like to call it real
time, is that, you know, we can't use
this to really like create the model
from scratch because users need to be
using the model. And so, it has to be
good already, and we can only make it
better. Yeah.
>> Yeah. So, it's kind of like cherry on
top to like really get this super
delightful experience for Yeah, totally.
the sessions. Hopefully, one day it will
be like big big cherry, you know.
>> [laughter]
>> Yeah, Dan Roberts presented at our
conference last year. I think you were
there. It's like traditionally, it was
the big cake and then the little cherry.
>> LeCun's cherry, yeah. Little cake, big
cherry.
>> [laughter]
>> Yep. I'm curious,
the the Andrej Karpathy line of like,
right now RL is, you know, still super
inefficient. You you do a big big long
rollout, and then you kind of get get
like, you know, a little bit of
information at the end, and it's still
like, I think slurping bits from a
straw. What do you think? And have you
have you been able to figure out how to
get more bits out of that path? Uh, I
can't talk about that. Okay, okay, got
it. We're back on We're back on the
secret stuff. Good. That's how I know
I'm asking the right questions.
>> [laughter]
>> You mentioned the rollouts are a few
minutes at a time. It seems like the
whole field is pushing towards making
like long horizon agents, agents that
can work for for a long period of time
uninterrupted, and generally not
failing. I love that meter scaling
charts. What goes into into the RL
process to try to get the agent to run
for longer? Several things. So, one
problem about sort of like reinforcement
learning is that the longer the
trajectory is, the harder it it is to do
credit assignment. So, you can imagine
like we are giving thumbs up thumbs down
at the bottom line right at the end of
its work. And sort of like, to simplify
the problem is like, the model asks
itself, "Okay, where did I do right and
where did I do wrong?" That's basically
the problem called credit assignment. It
gets harder as this gets longer, so you
have to do a bunch of tricks there. The
other problem is just like you run out
of space, right? Like these models have
a finite context window and at some
point they're going to reach that. So,
actually the way we solved this at
Cursor is we put compaction inside their
RL loop. So, we call this
self-summarization. So, during
reinforcement learning, the agent
actually learns how to continue and go
on forever. So, in practice, our model
is like a 200,000
context window model, but in reality it
can go on for millions of tokens and
just because of this ability that it can
summarize its work and then take that
summary to restart its context window
while still trying to accomplish the
task. And through RL, because RL pushes
the model to do
things correctly towards the goal, at
the same time jointly, we are training
the model to produce a good summary and
then we're training the model to listen
to that summary very well at the same
time.
And so, this is kind of like a
continuation to reasoning almost, I feel
like.
>> it fascinating because
I mean, usually context management is
considered like part of the hardness,
right? In this case, you're effectively
co-optimizing like how part of the
hardness and like model itself work
together and throwing all of that into
the optimization loop. And we've seen
this again and again in the AI that like
the more you throw computers at the
problem, the more you can solve the
problem end-to-end. The magic of
computing gets your lesson works and you
get much better system which can work
together. Totally. Totally. Do you think
every company's going to be
RL-ing their own harnesses?
Like do you think that every company has
the same shape of problem as Cursor? If
they are using AI and they're like
producing lots of tokens and they have a
product to optimize against, I think
it's it's like the right move and
they're the right direction to train
models. Yeah. Yeah, interesting.
Interesting. Um and so it so it seems
like most of the reinforcement learning
you did then was on the kind of like the
harness / tool use part rather than on
the
get good at, you know, completing next
token for code. Is that roughly the
pattern that other founders should have
in mind when they're trying to think
about where should I use reinforcement
learning? So, like if you're trying to
get an agent to perform tasks with tools
over long horizon, you need RL. If
you're trying to create a model that's
good at summarization or next token or
whatever, you probably don't need RL. Is
Is that a good framework for when you
need RL? I think RL fits everywhere. So,
even for tab, we used RL. Personally,
this is just my theory and it's not
backed up by anything. When you
pre-train a model, they're just The
models are just in the ingesting the
totality of human knowledge. Let's say
you're training a model for math. The
model sort of like learns all the math
on Stack Exchange. The model, when it's
presented with a math problem, and this
is a model that hasn't gone through RL,
the model is needs to wonder what kind
of person it is. Is it the expert? Or is
it the student that's trying to learn?
And so, one of the things that I think
happens during RL is that we're tuning
this knob, letting the model know, "Hey,
you are the expert. You need to do
things correctly." So, that's like one
thing that happens is we are sharpening
this distribution. Sort of like RL has a
few phases. So, like there is the very
first phase where the model learns and
becomes
very good very quickly. And then there
is like a second phase where like it
takes a lot of compute to continuously
improve the model and like that you see
the model starts reasoning and have this
pattern. So, in the very first phase of
the curve, I think that's where we're
just tuning the knob, telling the model,
"Hey, you should do things correctly
here." And so, RL in the small compute
case is also very useful just to let the
model know that it has to do things
correctly. That's sort of like my case
to this. Yeah, I mean, so second that. I
mean, you we see this pattern because
many of these cases you know, we helped
RL fine-tuning generally for many
customers and we see this usually you
kind of continuous pre-training
basically we train like regular
supervised fine-tuning is
simplifying you can say it's transfer of
new knowledge kind of in abstract way
and RL is kind of sharpening the
behavior or like particular qualities
you would you would want from from the
model and usually you end up needing
both. And even to your example of
summarization, it's actually like RL may
be very useful for this because
sometimes if it's if you want particular
style out of summarization, right? It's
really hard to like come up with
examples of like good and bad
summarization. It's actually like really
describing this precisely. But if you
use for example LM as a judge, right?
You can actually say very precise
rubrics. You can kind of
prompt your well saying like, "Okay,
this is the criteria how I am going to
evaluate whether summarization good or
not, throw it into RL loop, and let the
model kind of experiment with different
summarization styles, figure out what
you actually want from it." While maybe
another LM kind of evaluate it whether
it's matching particular rubric or not.
And that's kind of type of pattern which
you see a lot, not just in coding like I
see. Okay, I'm going to ask this
question to Dima because Federico is
going to plead the fifth. Um, you
mentioned LLM as judge a couple times.
Do you think that ultimately companies
will be more successful having like
experts hand examining RL rollouts and
you know, hand coaching the model
behavior in some way or do you think LLM
as judge, other automated rubrics are
likely to get us there? You don't really
like put experts directly in judging
general rollouts. I mean, that would be
some kind of like I mean, real-time RL
if it's actually users or like some form
of I don't know like RLHF or DPO. I
mean, generally the more verifiable your
reward is it
the better because it allows you to like
scale the compute and just get better
outcome. In some case and by verifiable
we basically means like how
can you automatically produce it without
a human?
Uh, of course if it's like math or
coding and you can craft something like
very deterministic, that's the best. The
reason why LLM the judge works is that
it's actually it's
generator discriminator distinction like
it's much easier to judge I mean the
central for humans, right? It's easier
to judge than than to create. Does LLM
have a C?
Yeah.
>> [laughter]
>> No implication there. But yeah, it's
much easier to judge and you can craft
precisely like different criteria you
want to run some answer.
And you see this pattern where you might
have like very complicated eval from
multiple aspects, right? Because if you
dump multiple aspects to a single LLM it
might be get confused how to judge,
right? Like you you might break it down,
okay, you're going to judge rubric based
based on style, based on like some
different aspects like based on
sexuality, kind of really craft this
rewards. Some of them will be the
genius, some will be LLM based and
that's what guides your model behavior.
Then you just
turn on turn on more compute and I see
the graph go up.
>> think that we're going to see RL be more
effective in the harder to verify
domains? Like do you think LLM as a
judge is sufficient? That's one of the
big things you would
you would you would start, right?
Ideally you want to figure out what is
their actual outcome, what is their
actual metric you want to get, right? So
kind of trying to approximate this
through LLM is one way, trying to get
bigger simulated environments is another
way. Like if you can simulate more of
your product, if you can simulate more
of your environment, usually you have
like final metric which you care about.
It's just harder to capture. If you can
figure out how to capture this, that's
great. And to your point about, you
know, experts, I mean experts are still
still needed, right? Because crafting
this task and actually encoding the
product experience you want,
that's that's what matters, right? We
went through software 1.0, 2.0, 3.0,
right? Instead of crafting software
directly, we went to crafting training
data. Right now you're effectively
crafting the evaluation rules. But
that's still very important. You need to
look at examples, you need to look at
the data, you need to look at like where
your product fails and how to nudge the
model in the right in the right
behavior. I want to ask about RL
environments, which is maybe related to
what you were talking about. It seems
like there's been a huge explosion in
just the revenue scale that some of
these RL environments companies are
reaching. What do they provide that's
actually useful? Cuz I mean Cursor, for
example, you have so much data on like
how your customers are actually using
your environments. What do the RL
environment vendors offer you on top of
what you already have? Yeah, we don't
actually use any of the environment
vendors.
I think So, it's very difficult to
construct working environments. It's a
valuable product for people that do not
have
like have access to these. However, for
coding particularly, there is like a
very large amount of working coding
environments available to everybody.
That's GitHub, right? You can go in and
maybe like you can have a model like
just install all of the dependencies for
a repository, and that's like a working
environment. I think a lot of the
difficulty comes from the infrastructure
as well. So, you can imagine that a
environment that's that works well for a
particular task may need like services
up. You're like making a change that um
let's say like a database migration.
To test that it's actually working, you
need the database up, right? And so,
those kind of things are very tricky. I
think like these environment companies
are like quite helpful for that that
kind of stuff. There are kind of two
aspects on to this, right? First, like
if you look at Frontier Labs, right?
They're trying to build
generic model which is good at
everything, right? So, they need to
cover all these different tasks
underneath, package up in one model, and
kind of encourage it to generalize,
right? So, that's that's kind of one
pattern, and that's that's very helpful,
right? In cases like Composer, right?
You have you have your actual product,
right? And I think that's what also kind
of video fireworks like yeah, if you
have your actual product, you should you
should do RL against it, right? The most
powerful environment is your own
product.
>> Exactly, because like that's where your
model actually will be used. And And of
course,
if you have Frontier Labs, you're are
going to
do it across all the products, right?
But, if you're if you're trying to build
the best model for your product,
specialize and tailor it. You should
just use your production environment. Of
course, you want to isolate it properly,
right? You don't want to model or have
havoc on your production database. You
want to clone it, etc. And there are
some, you know, tools from the
underlying companies which are just like
from general infrastructure which makes
it easier.
But, generally, you want your RL
environment to be as close to real
production as possible. And that's what,
you know, as an example, we see it is
if you look at kind of toy RL examples,
the toy RL framework, they always start
with like, "Oh, there's this like toy
environment. I'm going to spin up a
Docker container and run everything in
it." Uh which is great for like toy
examples if you are trying to teach
model how to play Atari or whatever,
right? But, if you're actually
transition to like production cases, you
can't just put your real real production
application in a Docker container. And
we found it pretty early ourselves like
working with many of our clients. In
case of course, our trainer on our side,
some other customers, we run trainer on
our training platform. But, for
environments, we actually default to
running them on the customer side
because that's where the actual
implementation is. And you you can you
effectively have the same setup of
trainer, even if it's part of our works
platform or on the customer side,
calling the actual production
environment, not trying to kind of wrap
it and componentize it. Yeah. On the on
the hosted platform because that's
really hard and that introduces
differences. Yeah, like I mean, what we
call RL environments is really three
components. One is the harness.
So, the harness is like where where the
model can submit tools and that tools
get executed. And the second thing is
let's call it the like a kind of
operating system, right? So, like what
is the actual like
world, the the end state where the model
is like interacting with. And then there
is like the reward component. We need
which needs to check at the end that the
work is is done correctly. And
generally, the harness is pretty
portable. You can take the harness and
put in in many different environments.
The thing that's key is the operating
system. And to replicate this
just normal containers don't really work
very well. So, at Cursor we actually
built like a whole virtual machine
stack. And so, we can spin up like
virtual machines really quickly. And it
has to be super bursty cuz you can
imagine like we are asking this system,
"Please give me 100,000 virtual machines
now." And it has to come all come up and
um
um yeah. Awesome. I really enjoyed this
conversation today. I think Cursor is
such an inspiration in what you all are
doing as a company towards going from
application company to really a frontier
mobile lab. And I think the work you do
with Composer too really leads that
charge. So, really special to hear about
it. And then, Dima, really cool to hear
about the hardcore infrastructure
problems actually that the two of you
solved together in the trenches over
many, many late nights to make it all
possible. So, thank you. Thank you guys
for joining today.
>> Thank you so much for having us. Thank
you.
>> [music]
[music]